Science fiction writer Stanley Schmidt is the new editor of Analog, succeeding
another writer, Ben Bova. Schmidt's own stories have appeared frequently in
Analog, and some are collected in Lifeboat Earth, published in 1978. One of his
earlier novels is also available, Newton and the Quasi-Apple, which came out in
1977 in paperback. Stanley Schmidt has been professor of physics at heidelberg
college in ohio is now devoting i understand the majority of his time to editing
i'm sure there's some pluses and minuses to to this whole business of being an
editor stan the main minus being you can't devote as much time to your own work.
Isn't that true? Well, I'm not at all sure that it is in my case, because I have
never been a full-time writer, except unless you count the year that I was on a
sabbatical when I was teaching, but most of the time, I was either a full-time
student or a full-time professor, and Ben Bova tells me that he thinks that that
probably ate up at least as much time as the editing does. I think the editing
job is possibly more directly stimulating to the writing. So his expectation is
that I ought to be able to do at least as much writing as I have been. And so
far I venture to hope that that's true. We have seen no lack of output on his
part, so I assume there's some proof to that. Yeah. He may have worked too hard,
but he said He's also good that he did more writing while he was editor than he
ever did before that. Are you into it now? You've started already as editor?
Yeah, I started at the beginning of September, which is interesting because I
didn't move into the New York area until the middle of October, so for the first
month and a half I was probably the only person working in New York City who was
commuting from Tiffin, Ohio. Do you miss the college campus atmosphere in any
way? There were things about it that I liked, but I'd say there are enough
different things that I like about where I am now that I don't have any regrets.
I'll look for chances to visit occasionally. You expect that eventually you may
go back to teaching again? I have no expectations that far in the future. Analog
is identified as a magazine of science fact as well as science fiction. Now, do
you intend to continue this policy?
Yes, at least in the same way that it is now, and possibly with a slight
variation. The policy so far has been that it's a fact magazine in the sense
that it normally has one factual article, per month. Now, a suggestion which
I've received from several people and which I'm considering is adding a sort of
science fact newsletter type of column that's shorter but has one or possibly
two alternating regular contributors. This would be a very short thing, but it
would be still a little bit of added page space devoted to fact, which subtracts
from what's available for fiction. So I haven't decided yet whether I want to do
it or not. I can see both advantages and disadvantages in that. Fortunately, I
don't have to decide right away. Are these factual articles highly technical or
are they actually written for the benefit of the layman, the science fiction
fan, if you will? I would say it's somewhere in between. For the science fiction
fans, yes. possibly to some extent a subset of science fiction fans. I would
hesitate to say either technical or for just any layman because in general the
analog audience tends to be very intelligent and very highly educated. Most of
them have strong technical backgrounds, but they don't all have the same kind of
technical background. And so we try to see that the articles are written in such
a way as to take advantage of a good general background, but without anything
very specialized or highly technical. Are the articles commissioned from certain
scientists? Sometimes yes, sometimes no. We get freelance submissions, and
sometimes we know somebody would like to do one. Ask them to.
As an editor, what sorts of things do you look for in a science fiction story?
In other words, how do you begin by judging it? Well, first of all, I look for
good fiction. And by this, I mean it has to keep my interest on it. We get so
many manuscripts in a week that one of the first things that I had to overcome
when I started this job was a tendency that I'd carefully cultivated when I was
teaching college. I did a science fiction course there in which students
submitted stories. And there, every student who submitted something was a paying
customer. And I felt obligated to give every story very careful attention and
constructive criticism. Now with a hundred manuscripts a week coming in, I
simply can't do that. And so I've had to resist the temptation to think of
careful comments on everything and learn to read very fast through some things
which you can tell at a glance simply aren't well written. And so it bothered me
at first to be flipping through the pages so fast. But then I realized that the
stories which are going to impress readers have to have something about them
which is special enough to keep the reader's mind on the page. And if the story
doesn't keep my mind on the page enough to slow me down and make me pay more
careful attention to it, I probably don't want it. So the first thing it has to
do is be written in such a way that it keeps my interest. No different, really,
from judging any short story. Or whatever field. And it has a lot of other
things also in common with other short stories. It has to have
good characters and plots that make sense in their own framework. In fact,
science fiction has all the same requirements as any other fiction, plus a few
specialized ones, which are in addition and the specialized ones are a little
bit hard to put into words but basically the thing I'm looking here is where
does the science fit into it there's always some sort of speculative science
element in the story and this doesn't mean the story is about science usually
these days it's more about the impact of the science on people but for it to be
really science fiction the kind that I'm looking for the science has to be so
integral of the plot, that if you took the science element out, the whole story
would collapse and it couldn't be told. If you think of some types of things
which are often considered science fiction, for instance, am I allowed to
mention a movie by name? Certainly. Star Wars is a good Western with great
special effects. I've heard it's called a good comic book. It's not a spooky
story but not necessarily a question. I would hesitate to call it science
fiction and to dual credit I believe I read somewhere that the people who made
it said that they never intended it to be science fiction. But my predecessor
was often quite upset about the fact that he thought the public was getting the
impression that this was what science fiction is all about. And it's not because
you can take the spaceships and replace them with horses and the lasers and
replace them with six guns. And the story still works, essentially the same way.
I'm looking for things in which the scientific elements play such a role that
you can't do that. If you take the scientific element out, nothing is left of
the story. Now, some stories have been criticized because they contain what
might be termed unscientific propositions or totally inane hypotheses, Have you
ever run across this sort of thing? You have a physics background. Do you feel
that you should judge on the scientific plausibility of any story? That's
certainly a part of it. If I find something which is demonstrably implausible, I
won't take it. However, the criterion I use for there is a little bit different
as a science fiction writer or editor than it is as a physicist. I would not
require that any element which is used in a science fiction story be
demonstrably possible. What I do try to require is that it's not provably
impossible with present knowledge. It's a very strong distinction, which is
sometimes very hard to get across to people. For example, something which is
controversial even among people involved in science fiction is faster than light
travel. is it possible or isn't it? And it's often alleged that the theory of
relativity proves that nothing can ever go faster than light. And that
particular argument, as it happens, I don't buy, I don't find it convincing
either as a science fiction writer or a physicist. But for this reason, I'm
perfectly willing to accept the logically worked-out faster-than-light travel
system as part of a story this does not mean that I necessarily believe that I
know that faster-than-light travel is possible I just don't believe I've ever
met anybody yet who knows that it isn't it seems like most science fiction
writers today simply assume that it's possible and then go on from there how
could you get to some of these other worlds without it you see well you could
for instance relativity itself provides ways of doing it but they have such
special properties that they greatly restrict the numbers of plots that you can
use. Do you find an awful lot of young writers sending material with this kind
of boo-boo in it? This kind and many other kind. You know, I've noticed in my
own reading that there seems to be a good many stories that have interesting
gimmicks to them, if you will, but are just terribly badly written. Now, if you
have this kind of a situation, do you have difficulty in choosing? You've got a
great plot, let's say, but a badly written story. Well, a little while ago, I
think it was before we were actually taping, you asked something about was I
getting completely out of teaching. Yeah. And I said, yes, this is true in the
sense that I have quit my job at the college in order to take this one. But in
another sense, I haven't because something which has been very prominent at
analog farther back than I can remember first hand is that one of the most
important functions of the editor is to be a teacher, to look for the kind of
thing that you see there. Now, it's a little hard to tell what to do if you get
something in that has a really good idea and just plain bad writing. I mean, bad
writing of such a level that it indicates there's nothing you're going to be
able to do about it with this writer, that I pretty much just have to pass up.
But what I'm very much on the lookout for is what the second editor before me,
John Campbell, who did an awful lot for the development of science fiction as
editor of this magazine, he said that the... one thing that an editor has to do
is to recognize a writer who hasn't learned to write. And this is something
which I'm constantly on the lookout for in the slush pile, the pile of
unsolicited manuscripts that come in from people that we don't know anything
about.
It's probably safe to say that most writers have got their start by being found
in that pile on somebody's desk with a story that has a good idea and almost,
but not quite good writing. The writing may be basic. It's literate at least,
but there's something wrong with the storytelling. You do. And in that case, I
will take considerable pains to write to the editor to try to put into words
what bothers me about the story as it stands. You would give the writer
encouragement. And challenge him to find some way to fix it so that I like it. I
try to avoid suggesting very specific changes. This is what I learned. I learned
writing from the two previous editors, John Campbell and Ben Bova. and one of
the most striking things about John Campbell's teaching technique to me was that
he never told me how to change a story. He always said what was wrong with it,
which is very hard to put into words sometimes. Sometimes it took me two days to
figure out what he was saying in a letter and then left it to me to figure out
how to fix it. And I think I learned far more that way than by going through
motions that he had spelled out. you mentioned the fact that you taught a
science fiction course and obviously there are more and more of that sort of
course on college campuses around the country you think they are going to be of
real help in improving the quality of writing and science fiction writing in
particular some of them will a far larger number are unlikely to in other words
you have it or you don't There are a number of scary things about this. There
are a lot of people in the science fiction business who are not at all sure
they're too happy about the sudden academic respectability. Particularly since
in some cases it becomes a matter of it being a fad and people are being,
science fiction courses are being offered in some places. Not all. There are
some excellent courses being given. But I know that there are courses is being
given in some places simply because somebody decides that the school over there
has one, we have to have one too, and we need somebody to teach it. A couple of
years ago, a friend of mine called me up and said, Help! And I asked for
elaboration on this point. And she said, I've just been told that I'm going to
teach a course in science fiction. And I said that I don't know anything about
science fiction. And they said, Don't change the subject. And so she wanted to
know if she could sit down on my course and try to learn something as she went.
Now, she at least was conscientious enough to try to learn something about it as
she went, but there's a big background there. You can't become familiar with it
that fast. That certainly would be the fad element and the end of it. We need a
science fiction course, so we'll look around for somebody who's, let's say, in
the English department. Also, I think very few of the courses are taught by
actual writers. Most courses are taught from a critics' viewpoint rather than a
writer's. and critics and writers tend to see things in fundamentally different
ways. Even when the same person is active as both, he has a different set of
ways of looking at things when he's acting as each one. You know, that's an
interesting point. There aren't, at least I have seldom read, good criticism of
science fiction stories. Is there any such critic who is writing? There are a
few. There are probably more now than before. There are also some others that I
wouldn't want to recommend, but there's James
Blish, A.J. Budrus, I think Theodore Sturgeon has done some.
But it's a field that seems to me there could be more done in that would be
helpful. Yeah. Were you a physicist before you were a writer, or vice versa, or
did they both develop side by side? At what point do I qualify as a writer or a
physicist? I sold my first stories while I was in graduate school as a physicist
before I got the graduate degree, before I was out employed as a physicist. But
I already had the undergraduate degree. So I don't know. Would you say that the
physics had been really tremendously helpful to you as a science fiction writer?
Could you have done as well, perhaps, if your background was in biology or some
non-science? A science fiction writer has to have some background in virtually
all fields. That's one of the things that makes it so interesting to me. Can you
pick that up from just reading, or do you really have to study the field? You
may have to read about it in quite a bit of depth. And I think there is a
tendency to be able to treat things with a kind of depth that you do have the
deeper background in that you couldn't with other fields. So I could have had
some other kind of background and I might have done as well at writing, but I
couldn't have written the same stories. For instance, Lifeboat Earth, while in a
sense it's a collection of stories, Really, the stories all form one larger
story. As a matter of fact, that book itself forms part of a still larger story.
But the lifeboat Earth sequence itself is one that I don't see how somebody
without a pretty fair knowledge of physics and astronomy could have even
attempted to write, because I had to do a lot of very detailed working out of
background. That's a good example, by the way, of one of the things that I try
to stress you were asking what kinds of things I look for in stories and I was
talking about how the science fits into the fiction let me put it another way
I'm looking for stories which are people stories but they're about people and
situations which grow directly out of the speculative elements in such a way
that you can't separate the two. Lifeboat Earth is an example of this. It's very
much a people story, but the situation that the people find themselves in is
that as the result of a core explosion in this galaxy, which this was mentioned
in an earlier book, actually Lifeboat Earth is a sequel to a novel called The
Sins of the Fathers. Anyway, in Lifeboat Earth, with the aid of some intelligent
extraterrestrials, Earth itself is being used as a sort of a spaceship. And it's
being moved to another galaxy to escape the core explosion in this galaxy. And
so what I have is a story of people set against the background of all the
changes that are occurring in the Earth as a result of this trip. now I don't
know how well I've succeeded but to even hope to be halfway convincing about
this you have to be able to work out what some of those changes would be and
some of them are quite different from what you might expect intuitively
and I know I put a lot of work into doing that some of it was involved enough
that at one point I went out and bought a programmable pocket calculator so that
it could work out some of the astronomical background of it for me Now there's
an idea like that Is that generated possibly by something you had read in a
physics book or studied in a technical manual of some part? Or did it start out
more with the people situation, a what-if type of thing? Well, I'm trying to
remember. This whole thing, which so far is up to about 150,000 words and still
growing, originally started out as a very insignificant short story, which a
good editor bounced and said, but now what can you build on it? See, being on
both sides of the fence, I can even admit from the writer's viewpoint that
editors are sometimes good for something.
I believe there I had one technical idea and I didn't really know what to do
with it. The technical idea there is one that doesn't even show up in what I've
mentioned so far. it's just the idea that if you had a way of traveling faster
than light, you could intercept radio messages, for instance, which you had
missed the first time around because your receiver wasn't working, just by going
out and catching up with them.
And that was the basis of the original Insignificant Short Story, and that got
combined with some other things There was another idea that I had had
independently that the question of, suppose somebody told us and could more or
less prove that the earth was going to become uninhabitable in a certain
relatively small number of years what, if anything, would we do about it? And
the whole situation that is now on the verge of becoming the trilogy grew out of
those two ideas coming together. This is something which has happened to me a
couple of times, and I know it happens to other writers too, that sometimes you
have two ideas, neither one of which will do anything by itself. But if you put
them together, they write a story almost spontaneously. Do you feel when you're
writing a story like that that it is totally separated from current reality, or
are you influenced by real contemporary threats to our civilization?
It can vary. It depends on a lot on the individual story. I'd say this one was
more influenced by contemporary things because it's a relatively near-future
story. I wasn't thinking of it particularly in response to any present threats.
Although in another sense, I could see where you could draw if you wanted to
some sort of allegorical connection. because this type of problem is very
similar to a lot of the problems that science fiction writers have been talking
about for years and normal people are just now beginning to realize they really
have to think about. That is the type of long-range problem, which you don't
need a solution to right now, but it's so big that even if you start right now,
you're going to be hard put to have a solution by the time you need it. and the
newspapers every day are full of problems of that type now.
The market for short stories in general has been shrinking over the years. Do
you think that analog, for one, has a very important role to play in preserving
a market for the short story? Yes. As a matter of fact, it has shrunk to the
point where science fiction magazines may well be the biggest market for short
stories, but there are so few of them at this point that we're getting a sort of
a positive feedback, vicious circle type of thing, where there are so few
markets and usually such low-paying markets for short stories that most writers,
after they become a little bit experienced and a little bit known, realize that
if they're going to make any money, short stories aren't the way to do it. and
they pretty much quit writing short stories and go off and write novels instead.
Not always as good as their short stories. No. Some people can handle one very
well, not the other. Do you think there's any hope for the short story in
magazine form in the future? I hope so. I'd like to see the market for it
expand. Thank you very much for talking with us today. Stanley Schmidt, science
fiction writer and new editor of the magazine Analog. Thank you very much.